Yashwant and Anandi live in a village in Rajasthan. Their school 
has assigned them a project to learn about craftspersons who 
work with metals. They decide to visit the local ironsmiths who 
practise this craft. Yashwant and Anandi request their grandfather 
to accompany them (Fig. 4.1). They are curious to learn how these 
ironsmiths make diﬀ erent items of daily use. They interact with 
an elderly craftsperson, Sudarshan uncle. 
Yashwant: Which items do you generally make?
Sudarshan: Generally, we make items of daily use, such as ﬂ at 
pans (tawas), buckets (baltis), tongs (chimtas), and farming tools 
like spades (phawras), axes (kulhadis), trowels (khurpis), and 
rakes (jelees). 
Anandi: What materials are they made of?
 Fig. 4.1: Ironsmith making various items
The World of Metals 
and Non-metals
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
Sudarshan: We use iron metal to make these items. We also use 
wood to prepare handles wherever required. Additionally, we 
use coal in our furnaces to heat the iron.
Sudarshan is heating an iron block in the furnace. It has become 
red hot. He starts beating it hard with a hammer.
Anandi is amazed and asks, “Why are you beating it?” 
Sudarshan: I am beating it to shape it into an axe.
Anandi: Wow, a piece of iron can be beaten into a ﬂ at shape! Can 
we do this with other metals as well?
You may also have many such questions — let us explore what 
else we can do with metals.
4.1 Properties of Materials
4.1.1 Malleability
Activity 4.1: Let us explore
Caution— Conduct this activity under the supervision of your teacher 
or an adult.
Collect some waste pieces of copper and aluminium, an iron 
nail, a piece of coal, a pea-sized lump of sulfur (gandhak), 
and a block of wood.
Recall the chapter ‘Materials Around Us’ in the Grade 6 
Science textbook Curiosity and observe the appearances of 
the above items. Are they lustrous? Also, note whether they 
are hard or soft and record  your observations in Table 4.1.
Fig. 4.2: Beating an iron nail with a hammer
Now, place each of these 
items one by one on any 
hard surface and beat them 
with a hammer (Fig. 4.2). 
What do you think will 
happen? 
Do 
the 
objects 
become slightly ﬂ attened or 
do they break into pieces? 
Record your observations in 
Table 4.1.
The World of Metals and Non-metals
Appearance
(lustrous/ 
non-lustrous)
Effect of hammering 
(ﬂ attens/breaks into 
pieces)
Piece of copper 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Piece of aluminium
Iron nail
Lump of sulfur 
(pea-sized)
Piece of coal
Block of wood
Object/Material
S.No.
Hard/Soft
Table 4.1: Appearance, hardness, and eﬀ ect of hammering on diﬀ erent 
objects or materials
Analyse Table 4.1. Identify the objects that are lustrous in 
appearance and hard. You might have observed that objects made 
from copper, aluminium, and iron are lustrous in appearance 
and are hard. Lustre shown by metals is known as metallic 
lustre. Materials like copper, aluminium, and iron are known as 
metals, whereas, coal, sulfur, and wood are non-lustrous and 
not as hard as metals. 
Are all metals hard and solid? Not really; some metals like 
sodium and potassium are so soft that they can be cut with a 
knife. There is one metal, mercury, that is found in a liquid state at 
room temperature, which you might have seen in thermometers. 
Recall the chapter ‘Temperature and its Measurement’ from the 
Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity. 
Which objects did you ﬁ nd become ﬂ at on beating with a 
hammer?
You must have observed that objects such as a piece of copper, 
an iron nail, and a piece of aluminium become ﬂ at when beaten; 
whereas other objects or materials behave diﬀ erently. This 
property by which materials can be beaten into thin sheets is 
called malleability. Most metals possess this property. Can you 
give some examples of metal sheets? You might have seen thin 
silver foil on some sweets and aluminium foil used for wrapping 
food items. These are formed due to their malleability. Gold and 
silver are the most malleable metals. 
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
A piece of coal or a lump of sulfur does not show this behaviour. 
They break into pieces and are said to be brittle. On the other 
hand, wood neither gets ﬂ attened into a sheet nor breaks into 
pieces. Therefore, wood is neither malleable nor brittle. 
HOLISTIC LENS
The impact of iron on the progress of civilisation of India
In the Grade 6 Social Science textbook Exploring Society India and 
Beyond, you learnt about the Harappans. They knew how to use 
metals like copper and gold. They used these metals to make various 
objects, from utensils to jewellery. However, you would hardly ﬁ nd 
any evidence of the Harappans using a very prominent metal iron, 
which you see a lot around you today. This is because it took a long 
time before iron was used in day-to-day activities.
 
However, once the use of iron gained prominence in the times that 
followed, it contributed signiﬁ cantly to the progress of civilisation in 
India. For instance, due to its strength, agricultural tools like ploughs 
made from iron were much superior to those used previously. 
 
What could be the potential reason that it is generally considered 
that copper was discovered earlier as compared to iron?
w
t
f
I
m
t
4.1.2 Ductility
Where do you ﬁ nd the use of metal wires? 
You might have seen wires of metals like copper or aluminium 
in electrical ﬁ ttings. Some ornaments, like bangles, necklaces, 
earrings, etc., are also made from metal wires. Metal wires play 
important functions in a variety of stringed musical instruments, 
such as veena, sitar, violin, and guitar.
This property of materials by which they can be drawn into 
wires is called ductility.
This property of ductility is mainly possessed by metals.
Gold 
is 
so 
ductile 
that one gram of it 
can be drawn into a 
2 kilometre-long wire! 
The 
ductile 
nature 
of 
metals enables for 
the creation of 
this tea strainer 
with metal wire.
The World of Metals and Non-metals
Have you ever seen wires made of coal or sulfur? Obviously 
not! We can say that coal and sulfur are not ductile.
Do you know that ropes made of steel [a mixture 
of metal (iron) and non-metal (carbon)] wires can 
support heavy loads? Therefore, they are used in 
suspension bridges and in cranes to lift heavy objects.
DIVE
EEPER
Suspension bridge
4.1.3 Sonority
Have you ever noticed the sound produced when a metal spoon, 
or a metal plate, or a metal coin is dropped on the ﬂ oor? How is it 
diﬀ erent from the sound produced when a piece of coal or wood 
is dropped on the ﬂ oor?  
Activity 4.2: Let us investigate
Caution— Be careful while dropping the 
objects.
Take a few objects, such as a metal 
spoon, a coin, a piece of coal, and 
a block of wood. 
Drop them one by one from a certain height.
Do you notice any diﬀ erence in the sound 
produced by these objects? 
I use the diﬀ erence in 
sound when my stick 
hits wood or metal to 
help ﬁ nd my way.
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
You would observe that the metal spoon and the metal coin 
produce a ringing sound. Coal and wood, on the other hand, 
produce dull sounds. 
This property of metals that enables them to produce a ringing 
sound is called sonority, and metals are said to be sonorous in 
nature. 
Oh! The ringing sound 
of my ghungroos
is also due to the 
sonority of metals.
Now, I understand! 
The ringing sound 
of the school bell is 
due to the sonority 
of metals.
N
o
d
4.1.4 Conduction of heat
Have you ever observed the vessels used for cooking in the 
kitchen? You might have noticed that the vessels used for heating 
are made of metals. Can you name some metals that are used for 
making cooking vessels? Do you know why these metals are used 
for this purpose?
Let us ﬁ nd out!
Activity 4.3: Let us investigate
Caution— This activity must be performed under the supervision of 
your teacher or an adult. Be careful while handling hot water.
Place a glass tumbler on a table. 
Fill it with hot water. 
Take a metal spoon and a wooden 
spoon of almost the same size and 
thickness.
Immerse 
both 
the 
spoons 
simultaneously into the hot water 
(Fig. 4.3) and leave them undisturbed 
for a few minutes.
Now, carefully touch the upper end 
of each spoon.
Wooden 
spoon
Metal 
spoon
Fig. 4.3: Metal and wooden spoons 
immersed in hot water
The World of Metals and Non-metals
Some discussion points:
Which of the spoons get hotter?
What does this experiment tell us about heat transfer along 
the two spoons? 
You may have noticed that the metal spoon is hotter to touch 
than the wooden spoon. Even though both spoons are immersed 
in the water of the same temperature and for the same time. This 
shows that the heat transfers through the metal spoon, making it 
hotter. In contrast, the wooden spoon transfers heat poorly. 
In such cases, the transfer of heat from one point to another 
of a material is called conduction, and materials that transfer 
heat are called conductors.
Based on the observations, one can say that metals are good 
conductors of heat, whereas wood is a poor conductor of heat. 
Now, we can understand why mostly metal vessels are used 
for cooking, and their handles are made with wood or other 
materials that do not conduct heat. You will learn more about 
this in the chapter ‘Heat Transfer in Nature’. 
4.1.5 Conduction of electricity
Have you ever seen an electrician using a screwdriver? What 
type of material is used for making its handle? You may have 
also noticed the electrician wearing rubber gloves and shoes 
while working. What can be the reason for this?
Activity 4.4: Let us design and create
Design an electric circuit, like the ‘tester’ circuit in the chapter 
‘Electricity: Circuits and their Components’. Repeat the same 
activity using the materials listed below and record your 
observations in Table 4.2.
You may collect a few objects, such as a piece of aluminium 
foil, an iron nail, a lump of sulfur (pea-sized), a copper wire, 
a piece of coal, a piece of dry wood, a stone, an eraser made 
of rubber and a piece of nylon rope.
Predict which of these could make the bulb of the tester 
glow and which could not. 
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
Table 4.2: Conduction of electricity by diﬀ erent objects or materials
Observation 
(bulb glows/does 
not glow)
Piece of 
aluminium foil
1.
2.
3.
4.
Iron nail
…
Lump of sulfur 
(pea-sized)
Object/Material
S.No.
Good conductor of 
electricity or poor 
conductor of electricity
You might have observed that objects made of aluminium, 
iron, and copper make the bulb glow, whereas sulfur, coal, 
wood, stone, eraser, and nylon rope could not make it glow. Do 
you see any pattern in the glowing of bulbs when using diﬀ erent 
materials in Activity 4.4? It is observed that all the materials that 
make the bulb glow are metals.
Materials that allow electricity to ﬂ ow through them easily 
are called good conductors of electricity. In contrast, materials 
that prevent the bulb from glowing by not allowing electricity to 
pass through them are called poor conductors of electricity. 
So, now we can understand that the plastic covering on 
screwdrivers and rubber gloves protect the electrician from 
electric shock because these materials are poor conductors of 
electricity.
We learnt that metals are generally hard, lustrous, malleable, 
ductile, and good conductors of heat and electricity. Now, let us 
learn how metals behave in the presence of air and water.
4.2 Eﬀ ect of Air and Water on Metals: Iron
You would have often noticed that iron objects develop brown 
deposits when left in the open for a few days. In which conditions 
would an iron object develop brown deposits? 
When it comes into contact with dry air only.
When it comes into contact with water only.
When it comes into contact with both air and water.
The World of Metals and Non-metals
Activity 4.5: Let us experiment
Caution— Be careful while handling iron nails.
Take a few shining iron nails. If you are using old iron 
nails, make sure to remove brown deposits from their 
surface by scrubbing them with the help of a small 
piece of sandpaper.
Take three clean, dry glass bottles or test tubes with 
tight-ﬁ tting caps or stoppers. Label them A, B, and C.
Take three iron nails and tie each iron nail with a thread. 
Place one iron nail and some silica gel in the glass bottle 
‘A’, and tighten the cap or stopper (Fig. 4.4a). Silica gel 
makes the air dry. It is the substance that is used in 
small pouches in some medicine bottles, water bottles, 
shoe boxes, etc., to keep them dry.
Place one iron nail in the glass bottle ‘B’. Pour freshly 
boiled and cooled water (to remove dissolved gases) 
into it until the iron nail is completely dipped in it. Now, 
pour some oil to form a layer over the surface of the 
water (Fig. 4.4b). The layer of oil on the surface of the 
water prevents the air from dissolving in the water. Cap 
the glass bottle tightly. 
Place one iron nail in the glass bottle ‘C’, and pour some 
water so that the iron nail is partially dipped. Keep this 
glass bottle unstoppered. This allows the iron nail to 
come into contact with both water and air, as shown in 
Fig. 4.4c.
Place all the glass bottles undisturbed at room 
temperature and observe the changes for 8 – 10 days.
Record your observations in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Formation of brown deposit on iron nails
Conditions
A
No
B
C
Glass
Bottle
Observations
Presence of water 
(Yes/No)  
Presence of air
 (Yes/No)  
Yes
Fig. 4.4: Glass bottles 
containing iron nails
Fig. 4.4(a)
A
Iron nail
Thread
Silica gel
B
Fig. 4.4(b)
Iron nail
Thread
Oil
Water
C
Fig. 4.4(c)
Iron nail
Thread
Water
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
What can you conclude from this experiment? 
It is observed in glass bottles A and B that the iron nails do not 
show any brown deposits. What does this observation indicate? 
This indicates that brown deposits or discolouration on the iron 
nails do not develop when the iron nail is kept in dry air alone 
(bottle A) or water alone (bottle B). However, in glass bottle C, the 
iron nail shows the presence of brown deposits. This indicates that 
the presence of both water and air is essential for these deposits 
to develop. Thus, moist air is responsible for the development of 
brown deposits on objects made of iron. This brown deposit is 
called rust. The process of formation of rust on objects made of 
iron is called rusting. 
Many other metals also exhibit discolouration when kept open 
in the atmosphere. Have you noticed the formation of a green 
coating on the surface of copper objects or a black coating on the 
surface of silver objects? Gradual deterioration of metal surfaces 
caused by air, water, or other substances is known as corrosion. 
Do you know that rusting of iron is a serious problem in our 
country? Every year, an enormous amount of money is spent to 
replace or repair iron structures damaged due to rusting. 
The rusting of iron can be prevented by several methods such 
as painting, oiling, greasing, and applying a protective layer of 
zinc metal on iron (galvanisation). We will learn about this in 
higher grades.
FASCINATING FACTS
The wonder of ancient Indian metallurgy!     
The Iron Pillar of Delhi was made in the time of 
Chandragupta II more than 1600 years ago. It is about 
8 metres high and weighs more than 6000 kilograms. 
What is interesting about this iron pillar is that despite 
all these years of facing winds, rainfall, and intense 
weather, it has barely any rust. 
replace or repair 
The rusting of 
as painting, oilin
zinc metal on iro
higher grades.
FASCINATING
The wonder of
The Iron Pillar
Chandragupta II
8 metres high a
What is interest
all these years 
weather, it has b
The Iron Pillar (Delhi)
In other words, it has been made in 
a way that it resists rusting. This tells us 
about the skills that were developed in 
metal technology in India.
The World of Metals and Non-metals
4.3 Eﬀ ect of Air and Water on Other 
Metals
Activity 4.6: Let us investigate (demonstration activity)
The teacher may demonstrate this activity.
Caution— It is advisable for students to wear protective eyeglasses 
and keep safe distance.
Take a magnesium ribbon about 
3 – 4 centimetres long. Clean 
it by rubbing with a piece of 
sandpaper.
Hold it with a pair of tongs. 
Ignite the other end using a 
spirit lamp or a candle (Fig. 4.5).
Let the magnesium ribbon burn.
What do you observe?
You must have observed that 
magnesium ribbon burns with a dazzling white ﬂ ame and 
changes into a white powder. Collect it on a watch glass. This 
powder is magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction 
between magnesium and oxygen present in the air. 
Add a few drops of warm water to this white powder, stir it 
well, and check its nature. 
Recall the chapter ‘Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and 
Neutral’. Find out whether the solution of magnesium oxide 
is acidic or basic or neutral in nature. You can use any 
acid-base indicator.
What eﬀ ect does this solution have 
on blue and red litmus papers?
You would observe that it changes 
the colour of red litmus paper to blue 
(Fig. 4.6); hence, it is basic in nature. 
Generally, oxides of metals are basic in 
nature.
We will discuss this burning of 
magnesium 
ribbon 
further 
in 
the 
chapter ‘Changes Around Us: Physical 
and Chemical’.
Fig. 4.5: Burning magnesium ribbon
Fig. 4.6: Testing the nature of 
magnesium oxide
Red litmus 
paper
Blue litmus 
paper
Watch 
glass
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
Fig. 4.7(a): Deﬂ agrating 
spoon
Do you know that sodium is a metal which is stored in kerosene 
because it reacts vigorously with oxygen and water. A lot of heat 
is generated in the reaction. Storing sodium in kerosene prevents 
its exposure to moisture and air. Can you predict the nature of 
its oxide?
Let us now discuss some substances that do not behave like 
metals.
4.4 Substances that Behave Diﬀ erently 
from Metals in Air and Water
Activity 4.7: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)
Fig. 4.7(b): Improvised 
deﬂ agrating spoon
Fig. 4.7(c): Burning of sulfur
Gas jar
Sulfur
The teacher may demonstrate this activity. 
Caution— This activity must be performed in a fume hood 
or well-ventilated area. Burning sulfur produces gases, which 
can be harmful if inhaled. 
Take a small amount of powdered sulfur in a 
deﬂ agrating spoon (it is a long-handled metal 
spoon used in experiments to safely heat and burn 
substances Fig. 4.7a). If a deﬂ agrating spoon is not 
available, you may take a metallic cap of any bottle, 
wrap a metallic wire around it and give it the shape 
as shown in Fig. 4.7b.
Heat it on a ﬂ ame, and as soon as the sulfur starts 
burning, introduce the deﬂ agrating spoon into a 
gas jar or glass tumbler (Fig. 4.7c). Cover the gas jar 
or glass tumbler with a lid to ensure that the gas 
produced does not escape.
Remove the lid after 3 – 4 minutes and take out the 
deﬂ agrating spoon. Add a small quantity of water 
into the gas jar, quickly place the lid back and shake 
it so that the gas dissolves. 
Again, recall the chapter ‘Exploring Substances: 
Acidic, Basic, and Neutral’. Using an acid-base 
indicator, check whether the solution obtained 
after the addition of water to the gas jar is acidic or 
basic or neutral. 
What do you observe?
The World of Metals and Non-metals
You would observe that it is acidic in 
nature (Fig. 4.7d). 
On burning sulfur in air (oxygen), 
sulfur dioxide gas is formed. On dissolving 
sulfur dioxide gas in water, sulfurous acid 
is formed.
Does sulfur behave in water the same 
way metals do?
Activity 4.8: Let us explore
Take some sulfur powder in a glass tumbler. 
Add a small amount of water to it.
What do you observe?
You may have noticed that there is no reaction when sulfur is 
placed in water. 
Substances like sulfur and phosphorus behave diﬀ erently 
with air and water than metals. Phosphorus is stored in water 
as it catches ﬁ re when exposed to atmospheric air. These 
substances are usually soft and dull in appearance. They are 
neither malleable nor ductile, and they are not sonorous. They 
are also poor conductors of heat and electricity. These are called 
non-metals. Their oxides are acidic in nature. 
Some other non-metals are oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon, 
etc. These must not be confused with materials such as plastic, 
glass, wood, rubber, and paper. These materials are not classiﬁ ed 
as metals or non-metals because they are not elements. 
Metals and non-metals are sub-categories of 
substances called elements. An element is a substance 
that cannot be broken down into simpler substances. 
Presently 118 elements are known. These 
elements are the basic building blocks of all matter. 
Some are naturally occurring, while others are 
artiﬁ cially made in the laboratory, and do not exist 
in nature. You will study more about elements in 
higher grades.
f 
e
. 
e
r.
e 
t 
DIVE
EEPER
4.5 Are Non-metals Essential in 
Everyday Life?
y
y
You often observe many metals in your day-to-day lives because 
of their distinct properties, such as their lustrous nature, heat 
Red litmus 
paper
Blue litmus 
paper
Fig. 4.7(d): Testing of solution with 
litmus papers
Watch glass
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
and electrical conductivity, and high strength. However, this 
should not give an impression in your mind that non-metals are 
not important in our lives. 
We breathe in oxygen, which is a non-metal, and without it, 
we would not be able to survive. Can you think of any other uses 
of oxygen?
Carbon is essential in everyday life because it is the building 
block of all life forms. It is a key component of proteins, fats, and 
carbohydrates, which are necessary for growth and energy. 
Nitrogen is used in the manufacturing of fertilisers and other 
chemicals. It is an essential nutrient for the growth of plants. 
Chlorine is a non-metal commonly used in water puriﬁ cation. 
A solution of iodine, a non-metal, is applied on wounds as an 
antiseptic. 
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Do you know that many metals and their alloys (mixtures of two or 
more metals or a metal and a non-metal) are important for daily use as 
utensils and tools. These are also important for modern technologies 
and essential in almost every industry. Some special metals are also 
used in atomic energy (such as zirconium), aerospace (titanium), etc. 
In India, many metals, especially iron and aluminium, are recycled to 
minimise waste and contribute to sustainability. 
In a Nutshell
Metals and non-metals are diﬀ erentiated based on their 
properties.
Generally, metals are lustrous, whereas most non-metals are 
non-lustrous.
Metals are generally malleable and ductile, while non-metals 
do not have these properties.
Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity, but 
non-metals are generally poor conductors.
Metals react with oxygen to produce metal oxides which are 
basic in nature.
Non-metals react with oxygen to produce oxides which are 
acidic in nature.
Generally, non-metals do not react with water.
Metal objects get damaged when exposed to moist air, and 
the process is known as corrosion.
Metals 
and 
non-metals 
have 
wide 
applications 
in 
everyday life.
The World of Metals and Non-metals
Let Us Enhance Our Learning
1. Which metal is commonly used to make food packaging 
materials as it is cheaper, and its thin sheets can be 
folded easily into any shape?
(i) Aluminium 
(ii) Copper
 
(iii) Iron 
(iv) Gold
2. Which of the following metal catches ﬁ re when it comes 
in contact with water?
(i) Copper 
(ii) Aluminium
 
(iii) Zinc 
(iv) Sodium
3. State with reason(s) whether the following statements 
are True [T] or False [F].
(i) Aluminium and copper are examples of non-metals 
used for making utensils and statues. [    ]
(ii) Metals form oxides when combined with oxygen, 
the solution of which turns blue litmus paper to 
red. [   ]
(iii) Oxygen is a non-metal essential for respiration. [    ]
(iv) Copper vessels are used for boiling water because 
they are good conductors of electricity. [   ]
4. Why are only a few metals suitable for making 
jewellery?
5. Match the uses of metals and non-metals given in 
Column  I with the jumbled names of metals and 
non-metals given in Column II.          
(i) Used in electrical wiring
(ii) Most malleable and ductile
(iii) Living organisms cannot survive without it.
Column I
(iv) Plants grow healthy when fertilisers 
containing it are added to the soil.
(v) Used in water puriﬁ cation
(e) O G D L
(d) T E N G O I N R
(c) P E P O R C
(b) N E C O H I R L
(a) E N X Y G O
Column II
6. What happens when oxygen reacts with magnesium 
and sulfur. What are the main diﬀ erences in the nature 
of products formed? 
ENQUIRY
WHAT IF
W
H
E
N
W
H
I
C
H
H
O
W
L
O
N
G
W
HAT
ELSE
WHY
WHERE
WHAT
COULD
CAN 
IT
?
WHOSE
WHAT WILL
HAPPEN
WHAT 
SHOULD
WHY 
NOT
?
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
7. Complete the following ﬂ ow chart:
?
?
Add blue and red litmus 
solutions separately
?
Blue
Change in blue 
litmus solution
Change in red 
litmus solution
Air
Heat
Ash
Water
8. You are provided with the following materials. Discuss which 
material would be your choice to make a pan that is most 
suitable for boiling water and why? 
Iron 
copper 
sulfur 
coal 
plastic 
wood 
cardboard
9. You are provided with three iron nails, each dipped in oil, 
water and vinegar. Which iron nail will not rust, and why?
10. How do the diﬀ erent properties of metals and non-metals 
determine their uses in everyday life?
11. One of the methods of protecting iron from getting rusted is 
to put a thin coating of zinc metal over it. Since sulfur does 
not react with water, can it be used for this purpose? Justify 
your answer.
12. An ironsmith heats iron before making tools. Why is heating 
necessary in this process?
Exploratory Projects
Dhokra, Bidriware, Pembarthi, and Kamrupi are some of 
India’s famous metal art styles. Find out the states where 
these artworks are made. Also, make a collage of their 
photographs.
On a map of India, mark the states where iron, gold, 
aluminium and other metals are found.
Explore the metals and non-metals found in smartphones 
and ﬁ nd out how they help the phone work properly.
Organise a classroom debate on whether the use of metals 
for comfort and luxury should be increased or decreased.
Disciplinary
Inter 
ty
Societ
Art
omy
Econo
Geography
Technology
History
INNOVATION
EXPLORATION
CURIOSITY
DISCOVERY
ENQUIRY